Hello and welcome back to the course on deep learning.
I hope you enjoyed the introduction into our ends and today right away off the bat.
We're going to jump into a huge problem that exists with our own ends.
All right.
So what is this problem called The Vanishing gradient.
It was first discovered by Sepp hockey writer.
And I hope I'm pronouncing it right.
I know we have students from Germany so you can comment if if the pronunciation is incorrect but e said
Sepp or Joseph is his full name is a genius scientist who back in the 90s while he was still not not
a professor this is a recent photo.
So he was much younger when he actually came up with this concept.
He found that there is a big big problem.
And we'll talk about the problem solved just now I just wanted to point out who are the people that
spotted this and basically as you'll learn from the further Charles Sepp is one of the founding people
in the modern way that we use our own ends and Alistair MS and we'll talk about that for the dumb but
this is hip hop writer so I just want to make sure you know who is behind all this.
And the second person is your show banjo.
He's a professor at the University of Montreal.
He also discovered that this this problem I think is a bit later in 1994.
So Sepp was discovered this in 1991.
Joshua wrote about this in 1994.
But again this is another person driving this whole pushing the envelope in the space of our own ends.
And if you go to the University of Maryland you look up your shoe your show's profile you will find
that your show has over 500 research papers and by the way there is your show banjo just hanging out
with young look on as you can see they all know each other.
It's a very tight knit community and it does sound like a conspiracy these people that are driving or
pushing the envelope in terms of deep learning.
This is just like a select group of people who are all all in it together they all know what's going
on there.
All Been doing it since the 80s or 90s and now it's all popping out into the world.
So that's just to give you a quick idea of who's behind all this and today and now we're proceeding
to the vanishing period problem itself.
So as you remember this is the gradient descent algorithm we're trying to find the look at the global
minimum of your cost function and that's gonna be the optimal solution optimal setup for your neural
network as you also recall your gradient or your information travels through your neural network to
your answer to get your output and then the error is calculated and is propagated back through a network
to update the weights.
And here we've got some way to announce.
So what happens in a recurrent neural network is a similar thing but here you've got a bit more going
on.
Right.
So when your information travels through the network it travels like that you've got lots of it travels
through time and information from previous time points goes keeps coming through the network and remember
that every node here it's always very important to remember for neural networks that every single node
here is not just a node it's a representation of a whole layer of nodes remember we're looking at from
like from the top or from the bottom they are they actually extend through this child down there into
into this presentation you can see there is lots more neurons behind the ones that we can actually see
because each one represents a layer.
They're important to remember that.
And so at each point in time you can calculate the your cost function or your error.
So basically your cost function compares your output which is in the red circle to your desired output
to what you should be getting.
And this happens during the training.
And so you have these values for throughout the time series.
So for every single one of these red circles you can calculate the cost function and let's focus on
one just to understand what's going on.
Let's focus on this one specifically at time T.
So you've calculated the cost function Epsilon T and now you want to propagate your cost function back
through the network.
How is this going to look.
Because you need to update the weight.
So every single neuron which participated in the calculation of the output associated with this cost
function should be should have their weight updated too in order to help it better calculate the output
to minimize that error.
And the thing here is that it's not just the neurons in directly below Epsilon see directly below this
red circle is all of the neurons that contributed.
And there's many more of them.
There's all these neurons as far back as you go depending on how many times steps you take you might
take one somewhere take two you to take 50 ten steps depending on how you set up your network.
And this is where the problem lies that you have to update or you have to propagate all the way back
through time to these Eurozone and we talk when we talk about time it's not that the problem is that
we can't travel through time.
Not at all that we've unraveled this network.
So this whole propagation can be facilitated.
The problem lies in something else and as much as I don't like putting math on the slide on intuition
slides we're not going to go through this math but I'll point out one thing here.
So this is the math behind answers and we'll definitely direct you to more additional reading which
you can do to upskilling on all of these maths.
So here we've got W rec and W rec stands for weight recurring and that is the weight that is used to
connect the hidden layers to themselves in the unrolled temporal loop and as you can see here on the
left you're in order to get from X T minus three from this layer.
Remember this is a layer to X minus two you need to apply w rank then from here to here.
Apply W.
And in simple terms in into intuitive terms what you're doing is you're simply multiplying the values
here as you remember to get from one layer.
Next we multiply the output by the weight and then we get to the next layer and then we multiply the
output by the weight and get to next.
Then we multiply output from here.
By the way to get here and the thing here is that we're multiplying we're the same exact weight multiple
time many times as many times as we need to go through this temporal loop and this can be set.
You can set this in your network do you want to do it once you want to look back one step you look back
three steps you'll look back 50 steps but as many times as we do it we have to multiply by the weight
and this is where the problem arises because when you multiply by something small your value decreases
very quickly and this is the multiplication comes from this P here and you can see that Piers stands
for multiplication so we have to multiply and that's where it's representing that as far as you go back
you're multiplying and as you remember weights are assigned at the start of your neural network you
as you see in the practical materials your weight are assigned at a random value but random values clusters
are and from there the network trains them up and identifies what they should be but if you start with
random double or random w red close to zero then because you're multiplying by many times the more you
multiply the lower the value gets.
So if you start off you might have a certain gradient going through your network being back propagated
through your network then you move backwards your gradient becomes less then your gradient becomes less
and then your grain becomes even less and what does that mean for the network and this is the important
part to kind of like get your head around what does a vanishing gradient like that why is it bad for
the network.
Well because the gradient as it goes back through the network it is used to update the weights and we
know that already well the lower the gradient is the harder it is for the network to update the weights
it cannot like it Deacon silk understand what kind of contribution each of these outputs has towards
the error and therefore you can update the weights but the lower the gradient the slower it's going
to update the weights and the higher the gradient the faster is going to update the weights and get
to the final result and so therefore if you have like for instance a thousand epochs these weights for
for this layer might be updated towards the end of the thousand there you'll have some final results
but these weights because the grain so so much smaller they're going to be update it's slower and therefore
by then of the thousand epochs you might not have the final results there and therefore this part of
the network is train this part of network is not trained based on this cost function but the problem
here is not just that you have your network is not trained properly but also that these way these weights
are this layer it's outputs are being used as inputs for further layers so the training here has been
happening all along based on involved based off of inputs that are coming from untrained neurons untrained
layers so it's kind of like a vicious cycle you're you're training here and you think you're getting
good results but because you're grading and so small here this is training so slow and outputs is giving
is so are incorrect are not final outputs and therefore you're training on the non final output so because
of this this balance because of varnish and grading you have a a problem in your network which is not
just that these weights and I've been trained probably the whole network has not been trained properly
because these weights are not being trained properly and and that's there's like a domino effect like
this wherever you look in the network always the ones at the very back are going to have that problem
and this is in a nutshell what the vanishing gradient problem for recurrent net root neural networks
is and that's that was kind of the main roadblock to using recurrent neural networks and let's summarize
this in a in a short slide so if w Iraq is small then your you have a vanishing great problem if w wreck
is large you have an exploding grain problem because same thing but then it's just gonna explode and
a hero important thing to point out here is that of course there's more to it right there's as you can
see there is in this formula there's other things like the activation function and and so on.
So it's not as simple as small or large or less than one greater than one but as a rule of thumb if
you are very small weights you're going to have a vanishing gradient if you have very large weights
you put one hundred in there the value of one hundred and you're going to buy it by step you're going
to have 10000 by Sept 3 you're going to have a million.
So then you have an exploding great problem.
So hopefully this summarizes exponent grading problem on an intuitive level because.
So in short because you're unraveling the temporal loop the further you go through your network the
lower your gradient is and the harder is to train the waste which has a domino effect on all of the
further weights throughout the network as well.
And so how do you combat the vanishing green problem.
There's a couple of solutions for instance for exploring gradient.
You can have truncated BRAC back for irrigation so you stop back propagating after a certain point but
as you can imagine that's that's probably not optimal because then you're not updating all the weights
but if you don't stop then you're just going to have a completely irrelevant network.
So is better than the original approach then you can have penalties.
So you could have the gradient being penalized and being artificially reduced.
You can have gradient clipping so you could have like a maximum limit for the gradient.
You could say never never have the gradient go over this value.
And then if it's over that value just stays at that value as it propagates further down through a network.
You can have that for the vanishing gradient problem you have soon other solutions you have weight initialization
where you are smart about how you initialize your weights to minimize the potential for vanishing gradient.
You can have there is a type of network called The Echo state networks and we're not going to talk about
that but they do somehow solve that or they are designed to solve the vanishing game problem.
But there's also a different type of network called the long short term memory networks or Ellis for
short which are extremely popular which are considered to be the go to network for implementing recurrent
neural networks.
And that's exactly what we're going to be talking about in the rest of this section.
So that's going to be very exciting.
We're going to look at a brand new architecture for recurrent neural networks.
Really can't wait to get started on that.
It's it's it's a very interesting topic to get into.
But for now this is this brings us to the end of the vanishing green problem tutorial and some additional
reading so additional reading you can definitely reference the original works by self harm writer and
Yoshio Bender.
So this is Seth's paper in 1991 from 1991.
It's completely in German so I'm not even going to read the name but if you understand and can read
German then definitely this could be a good read for you.
Then there's your show Benji's paper which is called learn learning long term dependencies of gradient
descent is difficult 1994.
Also you can reference that but what I would recommend looking into is a paper called on the difficulty
of training recurrent neural networks by Erasmus and scanner.
It's just newer it's 2013 and it's also got a sharp banjo as the co-author.
So probably who's supervising some of this research.
And here it summarizes a lot of the things that your show.
Banjo talks about in his paper from 1994.
So why not look at something newer.
I would recommend checking this paper out.
So there we go.
That's the vanishing grading problem.
Hope this was fun.
Can't wait to see you on the next material and until then enjoy deep learning.